that ever developed.
That's still what a library is, including this library.
Steve Riley was here in 1930.
The library probably had 100,000 books.
When Archie and I were here a few years after that, it probably had 120,000 books.
This year, sometimes it's past half a million, and the library is adding net every year 8,000 volumes.
So, in the next 20 years, the library will have to find room for another 150 or 65,000 books.
Books.
A collection of books implies collectors.
And those of you who read Nick Bassman's piece in the New York Times two Sundays ago know, collecting, as he called it, I wrote heroes.
He wrote that here.
No known cure.
I would have called it a bibliomania.
Well, we have two people here who have never been cured of collecting.
Steve, of course, particularly manuscripts, but also books, and actually books, are two world-class collectors.
And we are absolutely delighted that they have agreed to sit down here with Nick Bassbaines, who is writing a book.
on collections and collectors and who will, I guess you say, moderate this affair.
Nick.
Thank you so much.
When you talk about a half million books or... A hundred thousand books.
Of course, what's important to realize is that the university isn't just buying books out of a catalog.
It implies selection, taste, connoisseurship, discrimination, knowing what is really important
what the scholarly community needs to have to nourish the research that goes on.
And what you generally have are people like Steve Riley and Archie Hanna over here who are really among the greatest institutional collectors anywhere.
I just can't tell you how thrilled I am to be here today sitting between these two wonderful and important gentlemen.
As Al has mentioned, I'm writing a book about the formation of collections.
The first person I interviewed for this project two years ago was Steve Riley at the Massachusetts Historical Society, and at the top of my list to see was Archie Hanna, and two weeks ago we spent a lovely time down in Haven, ostensibly to talk about this day, but actually interviewing him for use of my book, so I can't tell you what a great thrill it is for me to be here and how appropriate it is to have these two men here on this occasion.
Not only are they really great
institutional collectors, but they're both Worcester natives, they both graduated from North High School, they both have Clark degrees, and they have both given generously to the formation of and the building of the collections here.
So I guess everything's appropriate across the board.
Briefly, because you all know who these gentlemen are, and I won't go too deeply into their backgrounds because you're familiar with them, but I think a little biographical background is in order.
Steve Riley has four Clark degrees.
This year he will celebrate the 60th anniversary and is receiving his bachelor's degree in 1931, but also his MA, his PhD, and an LLD.
Dr. Riley went to work at the Massachusetts Historical Society as assistant librarian in 1934.
He was librarian from 1947 to 1957, and director and librarian from 1957 to 1973.
How important was Steve to the formation of the collections of the Massachusetts Historical Society?
There is a wonderful exhibit on view now at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, and if you have a chance to see it, please go see it.
And they have produced an outstanding catalog
and in the and the title of it is witness to america's past two centuries of collecting by the mhs one chapter in there lewis tucker writes that steve's tenure quote constituted a distinct era a period of unparalleled collection growth and tucker quotes a colleague malcolm freiburg quote for institutional collecting has been concerned steve riley wrote the book riley tucker concludes was jeremy belknap resurrected
He was referring, of course, to the founder of the Society, Jeremy Volnapp, the man who said that the true collector must prowl about like a wolf for the prey.
And Steve, I guess, has many stories to tell about being on the prowl for these wonderful manuscripts that he's brought to the Society.
And he will tell us about the Adams Family Papers, I'm sure, and a number of other things.
Really a wonderful catalog.
Archie Hannah, Archibald Hannah, Jr., Clark A.B., 1939, M.A.
Yale in History, Ph.D., Yale, a Master's from Columbia in Library Sciences.
What is interesting is his great specialty at Yale was Western Americana, and from reading some of the stories, I understand that the first time he crossed the Mississippi was during World War II, when he was sent to Navy Language School in Colorado to learn Japanese.
But after the war, he went back to Yale, and in 1949, he began cataloging the great Western Americana collection donated to Yale by William Robertson Cope.
What he has said in later years is that what this experience allowed him to do was to have every book pass through your hands at least once.
And how many librarians can say that?
But every book in the library, he has handled it at least once.
But he knew not only what Yale had, but what Yale needed.
And in 1952, of course, he was placed in charge of that.
In 1955, he became curator of the Yale Collection of Americana.
As I said, though he knew the strengths of the collection, he also knew the gaps.
But from the outset, he was determined to produce what would ultimately be regarded as the best.
And I think everyone who knows anything about the Yale Collections and Western Americana, if you want to study this subject, you go to New Haven.
Of course, numbers are numbers, but when Archie began collecting for Yale, there were 10,000 books in that section.
Thirty years later, the number was 30,000 volumes, and I guess the number of manuscripts tripled as well during their tenure.
Archie, though he has traveled extensively, he always knew the value of knowing people.
When we had lunch a couple weeks ago, I mentioned the legendary Bill Jackson from Harvard.
He said, well, you know, Bill Jackson was the best friend Yale ever had.
I said, what do you mean?
Good old reporter.
Gee, what do you mean by that?
And he said, well, Mr. Jackson basically ignored the bookseller.
And Archie didn't do that.
And so consequently, when something really choice came up, who got the first crack, right?
I guess that a lot of this is knowing
not only what you want, but who has it, and how it can help the collection.
Both of these men have been very generous to Clark.
They've given collections.
And Archie, I noticed, has no fewer than a dozen important collections from his own library, including what I think is a unique social fiction collection, a utopian fiction collection, and the John Buchanan collection.
So Clark has really
has benefited greatly from both of these.
That's my introduction.
I hope it hasn't gone too long, because I know you want to hear from these gentlemen.
Between them, they have so many years of collecting, and I guess there has to be a high spot.
So, Steve, this is your 60th anniversary of Clark.
Why don't we start with you and ask you what has been the most satisfying experience as a collector over these years?
Well, every time I get a collection, it was a very satisfying experience.
And the one person that interested me was an early trustee at Clark, Judge Brisby Hall.
And I knew that there must be a collection somewhere of his papers.
I think it was Ted Shipton who put me on the track.
And he asked me, he said he thought that Mrs. Reginald Foster
probably knew a great deal about the collection.
So I called her, I asked her about the collection, and she said, well, why don't you come with me and we'll visit the old house?
And she said, we'll have a picnic luncheon, so you bring half and I'll bring half.
So we very gladly did that.
So we went down and the whole house was
And that was bad.
I made a mistake on that one.
We went to the house, which was next to Memorial Hospital in Beaumont Street.
And when I went in, I was scared to death.
But I thought no one had lived in this house for years.
And the wiring looked terrible.
And I thought, I wonder how long this house is going to stand.
So we roamed around and just loaded material with books and manuscripts.
And we had lunch out on the piazza with bees humming around us.
And then she said, well, now, she said, you must write me a letter and tell me why the papers should go to the Massachusetts Historical Society.
And I said, well, of course, you had a very close contact with Henry Capital Lodge.
They were senators at the same time.
and I said that we have the large papers, and I think it would be nice if they joined up together.
So she said, well, I'll think about it, and write me a letter, because everyone wants those papers, and let me know why they should go to the MHS.
Well, I repeated what I had to say, and so we were invited to go and get the papers, so we had to hire a truck.
And I think all the staff at the MHS went on that expedition, and we brought back really some marvelous things.
And one of the things that I didn't expect to find, but did find, was material relating to the famous Parkman-Webster murder case.
And I found in the collection one of the
Rockwood Hoare may well have been involved in the case.
He was a lawyer.
And so here are the little notes scribbled by Webster, passed across to his attorneys because apparently he couldn't appear in his own case.
Is that right?
And so it's fascinating because I just
So we've gotten through working with a Mr. Sullivan who wrote a book on the Parkman-Webster case.
And we had material at the Society, but this new material was also very helpful.
At any rate, we carried away with this group of
I must say that the people at the Society are always ready to drop everything and go out if there are papers at hand.
So we came back with the papers, and it's one of the strongest collections we have.
It's a very large collection of papers.
She was very nice, and she hasn't wanted to recall the papers yet.
Another collection that interested me was the Godfrey Cabot papers.
I was a little bit alarmed about this collection.
A biography of Gautry Cabot had been written by someone in Texas, and they didn't keep very close attention to what was being said in the book.
And there was a footnote there, which was sexual.
And apparently, I don't think they even bothered to read what had been written.
And so the first thing I said, well, we better
get those papers just as fast as we can.
I can't quite remember the name.
This is the man I used to visit.
He used to give me a quart of heavy cream and a dozen of fresh eggs every time I went to see him.
Mr. Bradley.
Mrs. Bradley came with
faithfully through the society.
I always sat in front seat, and after about five minutes she'd fall asleep.
Not because things weren't very good that were being presented, but she was an elderly lady.
And so I dealt with her husband, and he died.
He had had a heart problem, and I never knew it.
He had a jeep, and he'd go bounding over all the land, not probably caring very much about it.
So, but I talked to him, and he was interested, but he said, I thought that some approach had been made to the Smithsonian.
And one day he called me and said, I want you to come out to the house.
He said, the band from the Smithsonian is here, and you've got to come out too.
Well, you know.
that can exactly fill me with enthusiasm.
But I started out and found out that this math in Smithsonian had been shifted to another department.
And he didn't seem to be terribly interested in the papers.
He said, and I said, well, at the meeting, I said, I don't believe in breaking up collections and having one part go here and one part go there.
And I said, if the collection is beginning somewhere, I heard that it'll go as one collection.
So, riding home with a man from Smithsonian, he said, you know, I agree with you.
He said, the collection should not be broken up.
And so we did get that collection, and that was fine.
Those are the two, and I mentioned them earlier, that throughout the Goddard papers, I felt that they should go to Clark.
Actually,
President Jefferson had a real meeting, a group of people, I think mostly trustees, trying to find out what to do with the papers.
And, well, someone wanted to know, well, you ought to have a part for this and so forth, but my background meant
I didn't want anything but the papers, and so we did get the papers.
It's a big collection, and I see a little note I put down.
Somewhere he had just received word of his first successful flight plane, because he was very much interested in aviation.
And I think you wrote for the Wright brothers, wanting when they'd be able to carry freight.
So, I think that my friend can carry on.
Okay, great.
Of course, Steve's specialty was, I think we pointed this out, but Steve really specialized in the acquisition of manuscripts.
And we have a pretty nice balance where Archie really, though he also acquired manuscripts, his focus primarily was in printed books.
And one of the things we were talking about earlier is the relationship between an institution and a private collector and the building of collections for libraries.
Maybe we can start out a little bit there, actually.
Hello.
I would like to talk about one, because sometimes it isn't the size of the thing that gives you the most satisfaction,
the serendipity of it.
One of the most unusual things relating to the California Gold Rush is a series of colored lithographs published in 1850 in, of all places, Havana, Cuba, by two Spanish artists named Faran and Patroni.
And this is, of course, highly desirable.
The two of them had been to San Francisco in 1849, made some paintings, went back to Havana, and had them lithographed and published and sold.
I knew about the existence of this.
I had never seen even a single one of the twelve of them offered for sale.
Supposedly the only copy of this with twelve lithographs was in the New York Historical Society.
And one day I was in Boston and, as usual, called on Good Speeds and Mike Walsh, who was head of their Americana department, and he said, oh, I'm glad you stopped in.
Usually, when I stopped there, he said, what brought you to Boston?
I don't have anything to show you.
But he said, I think I've got something to show you.
And I don't know why, but out of the back of my mind, I said, what is it, the Ferran Impateroni?
And he looked at me, and he went to the safe and opened it up and brought out an oblong volume.
The Faran and Baturani lithographs, not 12 of them, but 14.
So that really makes a collector's day.
A research library, if it's going to have the kind of material it needs for scholarly research, cannot depend
on itself or its own budget.
As I think most of you know very well, any academic librarian who can squeeze enough money out of the administration just to come somewhere near coping with the daily demands on the part of students and faculty is doing very well.
There is never anything left over for building research special collections, and yet
These you need for not only your graduate program.
College seniors these days are doing research on a level that in my day was thought only appropriate for PhD candidates.
So, you've got to provide the material for them.
How are you going to do it?
And as far as I know, the best answer is the private collector.
And certainly this is how most of Yale's great collections got built.
Essentially, it started in 1924 when one of the professors in the English department, Chauncey Brewster Pinkert, who was himself a book collector, addressed the alumni
Yale was just thinking of building a brand new library building, what is now the Sterling Library, and the alumni were very excited about that, and Tink pointed out to them that it had to have books to go in it, and that they should take it upon themselves to form the kind of book collections their college needed, and then give them to the library.
And out of that speech came, a few years later, an organization named the Yale Library Associates, which is Yale's friends of the library group.
And Tink was not only a collector himself, he inspired a whole generation of collectors.
One of them eventually became university librarian at Yale, Jim Babb.
And Jim was a book collector, but as university librarian,
he collected collectors.
And so during his tenure, many of the outstanding book collections in everything from the field of Boswell and Dr. Johnson down to Western Americana, Yale has a surprising Tibetan collection
formed by a man who, well, he was an architectural draftsman at the time Sterling Library was being built.
Later he was a furniture salesman.
He was a personal friend of the Dalai Lama and brought together an absolutely amazing collection of Buddhist literature and history from Tibet, all of which is now at Yale.
Jim not only collected collectors, he also understood perhaps better than most librarians of his day the key role that the antiquarian booksellers had to play in building collections.
In fact, when we had finished cataloging the book collection, I was summoned to his office
And he said, well, I've decided to give you the collection.
How well you do with it will depend on your relations with the booksellers.
Get out of here and go meet them.
And I spent a great deal of the next 30 years cultivating booksellers.
And you know, when a rare book dealer gets something really desirable, he does not lie awake at night chewing his nails wondering how he's going to get rid of it.
The question is,
To whom shall I offer this?
And if Yale comes to his mind first, then Yale's collections will get built.
There is an international league of antiquarian booksellers.
And the first time they ever met in the United States was sometime in the 1950s.
They met in New York.
And all of them, 150 of them and their wives, were invited to New Haven for a day.
There was lunch at the Lawn Club, cocktails at the Medical Historical Library.
All of them were then invited to a buffet supper at the Liebert's.
He was head of the workroom.
There were special exhibitions, tours of the library.
In those days, this was before we had a separate rare book library, Sterling Library has a Gothic nave like a cathedral.
in fact as you open the front door and go down you look down this long nave and at the far end of the circulation desk with a symbolic mural behind it the story is that one stranger came in looked down the nave dropped to one knee crossed himself out again but in those days the gutenberg bible sat in its own case down at the end of the nave and one french bookseller came down the nave looking at
all these rare books on display in the exhibition cases, came to the Gutenberg, five of them said, huh, a trimmed copy.
I suppose that particular day's outing, for that, Jim Babb must have had to find three or four thousand dollars somewhere.
He probably went to one of his book collector friends and got it, but
what that did in terms of relationships for Yale with booksellers was absolutely incalculable.
And so that over the years, many booksellers, well, the ideal, of course, is to get the bookseller to send you page proofs of his forthcoming catalog,
And if he won't do that, well, at least send you the catalog first-class mail.
And when you get a catalog from an important bookseller, you drop everything and go through that catalog and mark the things you want and spend an hour or two hours or whatever it takes at the cart catalog.
And then you get on the phone immediately and place your order.
And if you're very lucky, you may get as many as half of the things you want, where if you follow sound administrative practice and turn this routine job of checking the catalog over to a clerical assistant instead of doing it yourself, ten days later you'll have the catalog back and then you
You dictate a letter to the bookseller and send the proper order form, seven copies each, and you don't get any books.
But, you know, in spite of the fact that this is the most efficient way of doing things, is cultivating the booksellers, the real reason is because the booksellers are so much fun.
They are perhaps an even more eccentric lot than the book collectors.
Any good antiquarian bookseller, given the same amount of time, expert knowledge, and effort that goes into his business, could be making four times as much as an upper-level executive in a big conglomerate.
but they are all individualists, and none of them would ever consider changing their jobs.
I think one thing I failed to mention earlier is that when we talk about the Massachusetts Historical Society, the perception might be that the collection is primarily Massachusetts, but I think being the oldest such institution of its kind in the United States,
At the beginning, at least, the MHS, Steve, I guess, collected everything, not just Massachusetts.
And when your tenure began, the volume became so great that you really had to refine the focus and really key on Massachusetts.
Is this a fair assessment?
Well, at the very beginning, when it was founded,
1794, just celebrating our 200th anniversary.
All those who were going to be made members of the society had to promise they were going to provide some books and so forth with the collection.
And so they did, and there were only eight to begin with, and they gradually increased their number.
It got to be 25, I think it was about 50 elected members when I went there, but it's now around 200.
But their members have been very generous.
Most of them were book collectors to begin with.
And then, as time went on, some of the old families have turned their papers over to us.
That's a great advantage of having a lot of Brahmins in Boston.
But the biggest collection, I suppose the collection that I always interested
people, what's going to happen to the Adams papers.
Well, we've had an Adams on the membership of the Society since 1800, and then the president of the Massachusetts Historical Society, 1950-57, was John Adams.
His son succeeded him, and I came to know him quite well.
Scholars have been very much concerned about their inability to get at the Adams papers.
It was probably the most famous collection for national history that we have.
And in the middle 50s, the scholars
who were more and more anxious to have at least a microphone made off the papers and made available to scholars.
And the meeting was held at the old house in Quincy, and some of the great editors, like Lyman Butterfield and Julian Burry and others, all joined together.
We went down there, and they, Tom Adams and his father,
thought it might be wise to have a microfilm edition to make sure that it would be safe anyway.
So we went ahead and it took us a long time to make a microfilm edition.
There are over 600 rolls of microfilm.
And we were also interested in another collection that had been on deposit for some years, and that was the Paul Revere collection.
In 1798, Jeremy Belknap persuaded Paul Revere to write an account of his right, and the longest account of his right is known in that copy.
I acquired later from Revere's sisters the first draft of it, and then I saw a second copy.
They told me later that they had taken everything from them except two silver spoons.
They're wonderful people.
And then what had been set up was they saw an organization that drew from all Adamses, and they got permission to have a room at the Society where the Adams papers were kept.
We had no control over them whatsoever.
In fact, I don't think I ever got in the room for the first 25 years.
But time came, and Samuel Fag Bemis, who was a graduate of this college, was doing his life at John Quincy Adams.
And fortunately, the man who had charged as a twin of John Adams, Henry Adams, who spent his day going over the papers,
Sam Bemis was working in the room, and so he'd go through the papers looking for things for Sam Bemis.
It was a very nice arrangement.
And out of it came across the great two volumes, which won a full surprise, of John Quincy Adams.
Well, this time going on, it was getting close to the next 50 years, and what were they going to do about it?
And a lot of holding their butts at that time.
they finally decided to turn the whole collection over to the Massachusetts Historical Society.
I don't think they ever took a deduction.
I'm not sure about that.
But then they came with a great rejoicing, and the deed of gifts consisted of two small paragraphs.
The Paul Revere papers were given to us of the same day,
And there was only one paragraph.
So here are two of the great, great collections that have come through the Society.
And they have been used by scholars.
In fact, there's hardly anything at the Massachusetts Historical Society that's not open to scholars.
We do not like to put restrictions on them.
And of course, we are used primarily by scholars.
and Lucy Morrison, all they said was that when he first went to the Society back in the 80s, he wasn't allowed to use the catalog.
But all of these things have turned out well.
It's a growing institution.
Our real problem is that we built in addition to the building in 1971.
And now our space is gone again.
Some of the salt and salt sent in these papers, nine or seven tons of papers.
All of a sudden, your space is going.
And we get big collections like that, and they have to be preserved.
Alice worked on them.
She said, you can say that, Alice.
that you worked on it because I couldn't find anybody else to work on them?
There are so many fascinating things that have come into the society.
I'm going to take a chance and read a couple of things which have always impressed me very much.
I am not going to read to you the famous Newburgh Address, written by George Washington.
When members of the army, the officers had not been paid, and there was a little insurrection coming, and he assembled them and read this speech to him, which just did away with the insurrection.
But there's one that I'm going to try on you.
I didn't fare very well with this one I gave in Virginia.
This is a letter, a dispatch dated at Madrid on February 6, 1878, by the Honorable James Russell Lowell, at that time minister, putting portentiary to Spain.
He writes, quotes,
One of the devices of four-card, which came within Mr. Sowell's knowledge, went in another department of the government, was so ingenious and amusing as to be worth recounting.
The Frenchman's object was to smuggle petroleum into Madrid without paying the tax.
To this end, he established his storehouse in the suburbs.
and then hiring all the leanest and least mammalian women that could be found.
He made good all their physical defects with ten cases filled with petroleum.
Thus getting them what Dr. Johnson would have called the pectoral proportions of Juno.
Doubtless he blasphemed the unwise parsimony of nature in denying to women in general
the multitudinous breasts displayed by certain Hindu idols.
For some time, these milky mothers passed without question into the unsuspecting city and supplied thousands of households with that cheap enlightenment, which cynics say is worse than none.
Meanwhile, Monsieur Foucault's pockets swelled in exact proportion to the Quaker breastworks of the improvised wet nurses.
Could he only have been moderate?
could he only have bethought him in time of the naked Nemus.
But on a fatal day he sent in a damsel whose contours aroused in one of the guardians at the gates.
The same emotions as those of Maritone's in the bosom of the carrier.
With the playful gallantry of a superior, he tapped the object of his admiration and it tinkled.
He had struck oil unawares.
Love shook his wings and fled.
Doobie ended drowning.
Monsieur Foucault's perambulating wells suddenly went dry.
I spoke before the Virginia Historical Society and I blazed out a lot of stony faces.
So, I'm glad I got this response.
I might read it again sometime.
But I also... I...
take a few quotations of the ones that interested me.
This is Harriet Beecher's Still.
Today, I have taken my pen from the last chapter of Uncle Tom's Cabin.
And I think you will understand me when I say that I feel as if I had written some of it almost with my heart's blood.
I look upon it almost as a despairing appeal to civilized humanity.
In the close of it, I think you may trace the result
of some of your suggestions, that was asked, ma'am.
It has been the most cheering thing about the whole endeavor to me, that men like you would feel it, while so deeply has the cause I speak for, is low in itself with my life.
That sympathy for that seems to me almost a personal failure.
But I suppose most of you have heard the exchange between Lincoln and Edward Everett, if you watch the Civil Law series on television.
Well, those have to be ours.
But Edward Everett wrote a little bit more, which I think is interesting.
He said, all of us at one time could recite the Gettysburg Address.
May I close by relating the circumstances under which it was given?
You will remember that when Lincoln gave his classic address, he was preceded by a speaker who talked for several hours.
That speaker was Edward Everett, one of the great artists of the day, whose name is now largely forgotten.
Some time ago, we acquired the Everett Tapes, which contained not only Everett's diaries and letter books, but also his incoming correspondence.
This description of what occurred at the dedication of the cemetery at Gettysburg follows.
November 18, 1863.
At about five, the president, accompanied by several members of his cabinet, with the French minister and Admiral Reynaud, the Italian minister, and some other foreign personages, arrived.
Parties continued to arrive all the evening, and an immense number of persons filled up the little town.
Thirty-eight were lodged at Mr. Wills,
Governor Curtin did not get in until 11, and at first it was proposed to put the governor into my bed with me.
He kindly went out and found the lodging elsewhere.
Two ladies were put into bed with Charlie.
That's the daughter, Charlotte.
The bed broke down and she retook herself to the floor, but the Amy and Bo family made the most herculean and as far as possible successful efforts to accommodate us.
I mention these facts only to show the prodigious resort to the little town.
The person spoke a few words in the evening to the multitude in the street.
I did not get to bed till half past 11.
And the fear of having the executive of Pennsylvania tumbled in upon me kept me awake till one.
Nervousness about tomorrow, no doubt, had something to do with my unrest.
Thursday, November 19.
The sun slightly veiled.
but upon the whole, a most favorable day.
The procession started punctually at 10.
The president mounted.
I went in a carriage with the president of the college, Dr. Stockton, the chaplain, and Mr. Wills.
We reached a tent pitched at my request in the rear of the platform.
I requested and was promised that it would be and it should be in two divisions, one for my private use with a peau de chambre.
On arriving, I found to my dismay that the tent was not double and that the canvas front and rear gaped wide so that all privacy was out of the question, though the only utensil was provided covered with the newspaper.
Into this tent, thus arrayed, I was ushered with eight or ten men and women.
They, by degrees, comprehended the nature of the position and left me alone.
that we alone masters at the words of it.
Dinner of the evening at Mr. Willis for a very large company.
The poor president had to attend an hour with that.
You will notice that no mention is made of Lincoln's Gettysburg Address.
On the following day, however, Everett wrote Lincoln, thanking him for many kindnesses
and tending him the following tribute.
Permit me also to express my great admiration of the thoughts expressed by you with such eloquent simplicity and appropriateness at the consecration of the cemetery.
I should be glad, if I could flatter myself, that I came as near to the central idea of the occasion in two hours as you did in two minutes.
My son who parted from me at Baltimore and my daughter conferred in this sentiment.
Lincoln's reply to Herbert's letter is one of our most prized documents, written the same day.
Your kind notice today is received.
In our respective parts yesterday, you could not have been excused to make a chartered dress, nor I alone won.
I am pleased to know that in your judgment, the little I did say was not entirely a failure.
Of course I knew Mr. Everett would not fail, and yet while the whole discourse
was eminently satisfactory and will be of great value, there were passages in it which transcended my expectation.
The point made against the theory of the general government being only an agency whose principles are the states was new to me and as I think is one of the best arguments for the national supremacy.
The tribute to our noble woman for their angel ministering to the suffering soldiers surpasses in its way
as do the subjects of it, whatever has gone before.
Our sick boy, for whom you kindly inquire, we hope is past the worst.
Your obedient servant, Abe Lincoln.
Of course, that was Ted, who died.
I could read a lot more, but I guess it's time.
A quick question, Steve.
Did these just come to the Society as part of it?
Nearly all the papers that come to the Society come as gifts.
They mostly come from old, distinguished people who have served in superior offices.
Edward Everett, of course, was one of the great, great orators of his day.
He was president of Harvard.
He did do a very good job there.
And he was minister to Great Britain.
He was one of the first ones to the Greek Revolution of 1825, and one of the first people to go abroad to study at a German university.
And it was a huge collection of papers.
A key phrase that Steve used is deed of gift.
I think that's very important.
During lunch today, I think you said the most you ever spent for a book was $26,000.
That was two books.
There is kind of a difference in focus where the Massachusetts Historical Society is
collecting papers and they are really also interested in having the papers given to them.
At an educational institution like Harvard, an academic institution, you do have a curriculum, I gather, Archie, that you kind of have to keep in mind.
Is that a fair?
Well, essentially the library is faced with an impossible situation in that the first obligation is the needs of the present curriculum.
faculty members doing their own research approach the library, and if you have a faculty member who is, let's say, working on the history of German East Africa, he is demanding that you provide him with materials for that.
Somehow you manage to find those,
and very soon you'll have the beginnings of a good collection on German East Africa, but by that time he's finished his book and he is now engaged in the history of the United Arab Emirates, and there is no more interest in that collection.
And then, to talk that up, if you are a really good librarian,
you're involved not only with what the faculty want right now, but things that the faculty will not even know that they want until 15 years from now.
And this is why you do have to cultivate the private collective.
Now, too often we think of book collectors in terms of wealthy men who can buy Shakespeare's first folios,
or illuminated medieval manuscripts.
Well, that's fine.
It was a wonderful day, for instance, when Jim Babb opened up a letter from E.J.
Beinecke, which said, in closed, you will find a check for $200,000.
I do not want any nonsense about your setting this up as a fund.
You are to spend this.
That's fine.
But when you consider
I'm blowing my own horn here, but this is the kind of collecting that I know best.
Even someone on a librarian's salary can collect books.
Now, you're going to find time and again that you get started on a collection and suddenly you get priced out of the market.
At one point, for example,
I was collecting the Victorian novelist George MacDonald, whom you may know as the writer at the back of the North Pole.
He wrote 20 or 30 more novels.
He wrote poetry.
He was a minister, wrote sermons.
But I was buying three-volume first editions of his books from English booksellers,
for three pounds, which at that time would have been about seven dollars and a half, or if the book fellow was being ritzy, three guineas, which added another 75 cents to it.
And then all of a sudden, Victorian fiction became the rave, and books that I paid seven dollars and a half for all of a sudden were 175 dollars, and I never did manage to finish a collection of George McDonnell's.
uh if the first thing of course it has to be a subject that interests you personally or you will not pursue it with enthusiasm if you're collecting with a library in mind and you know space is limited uh in our homes and so for for 20 years at least every collection that i have ever made has had a college library in mind most required uh so you need
a collection which will not only interest you but is worth making from the point of view of this having some value as research or potential research material to students and faculty and then it has to be a subject that the book collecting world has not caught up with yet so that for a while at least you can have the feel to yourself
And so what it means is that you have all the pleasure of grubbing around in antiquarian bookshops among books that are not important enough to attract the attention of wealthy collectors.
And if you then can put in the time and effort, you can form a worthwhile collection, the biggest one that I ever did.
one that Nick mentioned, American social fiction.
Some of you remember that during the war there was such a thing as editions for the armed forces, those paperback records.
And I read many of those on transports in the Pacific.
And there were two of them that particularly caught my attention.
One was a novel by William Worcester Haynes called Slim about construction linemen.
Well, I was a beginning graduate student in history when the war broke out, and it struck me, reading this novel, that here was an aspect of American labor history that would be impossible to document anywhere, perhaps, except in this novel.
Construction linemen do not keep diaries or write treatises on their work.
The other one was a novel about the old, old Navy called Delilah, and it was about a destroyer on Philippine Station around 1914.
And the important thing about it was that it essentially was concerned with what relations among enlisted men, among officers, and between officers and enlisted men were like in that old Navy of the great white fleet.
It's the only place I have ever seen
uh where this subject is handled by somebody who knew what he was talking about and so when i was looking for a field to collect and i started collecting books about trades occupations and professions and that went on to include that business and industry and then also regions or locality now
Actually, I have first become interested in American utopian fiction of the 19th century, but since Lyle Wright published his three-volume bibliography of 19th century American fiction, all the prices went up.
One of the bookseller can say, write free number so-and-so, then you can add $15 to the price.
There hadn't been any bibliography for the first part of the 20th century.
So I went through Publishers Weekly week by week for the 50 years of the century and tried to guess from the blurbs of which novels actually fitted my field and came up with about 2,000 titles.
By the time my bibliography finally got published six years ago, it was up to 3,900 titles.
So far, I have managed to find and turn over to Sue
about 2,600 of those 3,900 titles, and I think that the most that I paid for any one of them, and that was under protest, but because I knew I wouldn't ever be able to find it for 50 cents, I think I paid $25, at least for a few of them.
But many of them I found on 50-cent shelves outside bookshops.
And now, of course, it's getting harder because Lyle Wright's bibliography is going to be continued to cover the first 25 years of this century.
So there probably will be some of the 3,900 I'm never going to be able to find for Clark.
You can do this.
You can really help build your college library, provide material for future generations if you're willing.
You need simply enthusiasm and a certain amount of time, and I should warn you,
The best books are always either on the top shelf or the bottom shelf.
And I am now getting too old to lie flat on the floor to see what's on the bottom shelf.
Briefly, this is one of the great examples of how a collection is really greater than its individual parts.
Taken individually, some of these books perhaps are $50 books, or $1 books, but taken as 3,900 titles reflecting one sensibility, one focus,
You have a very important collection and an archive that is useful in an institution like Clark.
We're kind of running out of time, but we certainly would be happy to take some questions if anybody has anything they would like to ask either of our distinguished guests.
I didn't preface our comments earlier by saying that we would do this.
But it is 3.30 in any case, so I'll turn it back to you.
Well, I just want to thank both of our students.
Just a personal note, it makes me very proud to be a graduate of Clark University when I think of the achievements of men like Archie Hanna and Steve Brown.
I'd like to invite you.